RAG - Designing the CLI interface
---

This is the second article of a series in which I am building an open source RAG CLI tool. In the [previous article](story/1.goal-and-analysis.md) we defined the goal of the tool and analyzed the steps to achieve it. 

In this article, we will design the CLI interface and start writing some code.

> Hold on, do I really need to read the previous article to be able to follow with this one?

Ideally yes, but here is the summary we achieved in the previous article:

We are building a CLI tool that stores documentations of different frameworks/libraries and allows to do semantic search and extract the relevant parts from them.

**Requirements:**
- Git: will be used to clone the documentations repository
- Ollama: will be used to generate embeddings

**Assumptions / Limitations:**
- We are assuming that the documentations are available as markdown files on a Git repository

**Database:**
We choose to go with SQLite for now and add support for other databases in the future.

# Designing the CLI interface

## Brainstorming

Let's call our tool `rag`, the first commands that come to mind are:

- `rag setup`: setup the requirements of the tool (git, ollama, the embeddings model, ...).
- `rag add`: add documentations to the tool.
- `rag get`: retrieve the relevant parts from documentations.

> if I understand correctly, the `setup` command should be run right after the installation of the tool. What happens if the user doesn't run it and start by doing a `rag add` or `rag get` directly?

Good catch, my first idea would be to show an error message asking the user to run the `setup` command first. But now that I am thinking about it, if we can detect when some requirements are missing, then we can automatically install them, let the user know via a message (maybe on stderr to avoid polluting the output), and then continue with the requested command.

**Pros:** The commands just work out of the box, they automatically add missing requirements when needed. No need for a `setup` command.
**Cons:** All commands have to check requirements at startup, which can slow down the tool.

I think the resilience we gain by automatically handling requirements is worth the performance hit. A slower command is better than a command that doesn't work.

> I agree with you on removing the `setup` command and checking requirements at the start of each command. But I would ask for user's permissions before installing any new software on their system.

You are right, we should ask for permissions before installing any new software.

> Ok, now for the `add` command, what would be the arguments?

I was thinking of something like:

```
rag add <name> <repo_url> [--subdir <subdir>] [--branch <branch>]
```
- `<name>`: the name of the framework/library
- `<repo_url>`: the URL of the repository
- `--subdir <subdir>`: a subdirectory of the repository where the documentation markdown files are stored
- `--branch <branch>`: the branch of the repository

> Looking good, but how do we handle different versions of the same framework/library?

Ah, good point. I feel like adding a `--version` flag would make the command complicated, especially because we should also point to the correct branch/tag to fetch the docs of the correct version.
A simpler way is to let the user handle that by adding the version to the name itself, something like
```
rag add tailwindcss:v2 https://github.com/tailwindlabs/tailwindcss --branch v2 --subdir src/pages/docs
rag add tailwindcss:v3.4 https://github.com/tailwindlabs/tailwindcss --branch v3.3 --subdir src/pages
```

I feel that this will be easier to handle while giving the user the ability to have docs of different versions of the same framework/library.

> I am not convinced that this is the best approach, but let's go with it. Now what if the user already has a documentation in the database and try to add it again? will it overwrite the existing one?

Good question, I think we should show an error message saying that a documentation with the same name already exists.

> Ok, but how would the user update a documentation that already exists?

We can add a new command to do that

```
rag update <name> [--repo_url <repo_url>] [--subdir <subdir>] [--branch <branch>]
```

This would update the existing documentation `repo_url`, `subdir` or `branch` if provided, then fetch and update the docs.

And we can also add a `rag remove` command to remove a documentation from the database when needed.

So far we have the following commands:

```
rag add <name> <repo_url> [--subdir <subdir>] [--branch <branch>]
rag update <name> [--repo_url <repo_url>] [--subdir <subdir>] [--branch <branch>]
rag remove <name>
rag get ...
```

Since the three commands `add`, `update` and `remove` handle docs, we can group them under a `docs` command:

```
rag docs add <name> <repo_url> [--subdir <subdir>] [--branch <branch>]
rag docs update <name> [--repo_url <repo_url>] [--subdir <subdir>] [--branch <branch>]
rag docs remove <name>
```

> Good, now what about the `get` command? what are the arguments?

This is the main command of our tool, let's start with something like:

```
rag get <prompt> [--count <count>]
```
- `prompt`: the prompt for which we want to retrieve the relevant parts
- `--count <count>`: the number of relevant parts to retrieve

This would print the relevant parts to stdout.

> What if the prompt contains multiple lines? wouldn't it make sense to read the prompt from stdin?

Hmm, yeah. Let's support both; if the argument exists we use it, otherwise we read the prompt from stdin.

> I think it will also be useful to to have a json output option, so that we can call the command from within some code and easily parse the output.

Good idea, let's add a `--json` flag. With this flag, the output would be as follows:

```
[
  {
    "meta": {
      "collection": "tailwindcss:v3.4",
      "filename": "getting-started.md",
      "similarity": 0.8,
      ...
    },
    "content": "markdown content of the relevant part ..."
  },
  ...
]
```

## Specifications

The `rag` tool will have the following subcommands:

```sh
# add new documentations
rag docs add <name> <repo_url> [--subdir <subdir>] [--branch <branch>]

# update existing documentations
rag docs update <name> [--repo_url <repo_url>] [--subdir <subdir>] [--branch <branch>]

# remove existing documentations
rag docs remove <name>

# get relevant parts from documentations
rag get <prompt> [--count <count>] [--json]
```

All commands should check for requirements at startup and ask for permissions before installing any new software on the user's system.

# Implementing the CLI interface

## Choosing the programming language

I think it's time to choose the language in which we will implement this tool, so that we can start to write some code. My constraints are:

1. I want to be able to ship the tool as a single executable file.
2. I want implement a working version as soon as possible.
3. The tool is not computationally intensive, and I don't need to handle many threads.

Given these constraints, I will go with Typescript and [Bun](https://bun.sh/) for this project.

> But you said you need to compile your code into a single binary, can Typescritpt do that?

Yes, Bun can produce a binary of your code: https://bun.sh/docs/bundler/executables

> I thought Python was the preferred language for AI stuff, and it seems to fit your constraints.

Yes, Python would be a good option. I just chose Typescript because I am more familiar with it.

## Creating the project

Let's start by creating an empty bun project:

```
bun init
```

After writing the project name `rag` and the entry file `src/main.ts`, I have the following directory structure:

```
node_modules/
src/
  main.ts
.gitignore
bun.lockb
package.json
tsconfig.json
```

I like to use Prettier to format my code, so

```
bun add -D prettier
```

and create a `.prettierrc` file:

```
{
  "printWidth": 155,
  "semi": false,
  "tabWidth": 2,
  "singleQuote": true,
  "trailingComma": "all",
  "bracketSpacing": true
}
```

## Implementing the CLI interface

I chose to use the `commander` package to implement the CLI interface. After installing it, I wrote the following code in `src/main.ts`:

```ts
import { program } from 'commander'

program.name('rag').version('0.0.1').description('Simple RAG system for developers')

const docs = program.command('docs').description('Manage documentations')

docs
  .command('add')
  .description('Add new documentation')
  .argument('<name>', 'Name of the documentation')
  .argument('<repo_url>', 'URL of the Git repository')
  .option('--subdir <subdir>', 'Subdirectory within the repository', '.')
  .option('--branch <branch>', 'Branch to use', 'main')
  .action((name, repo_url, options) => {
    console.log(`Adding documentation ${name} from ${repo_url} with options ${JSON.stringify(options)}`)
  })

docs
  .command('update')
  .description('Update existing documentation')
  .argument('<name>', 'Name of the documentation')
  .option('--repo_url <repo_url>', 'New repository URL')
  .option('--subdir <subdir>', 'New subdirectory within the repository')
  .option('--branch <branch>', 'New branch to use')
  .action((name, options) => {
    console.log(`Updating documentation ${name} with options ${JSON.stringify(options)}`)
  })

docs
  .command('remove')
  .description('Remove existing documentation')
  .argument('<name>', 'Name of the documentation')
  .action((name) => {
    console.log(`Removing documentation ${name}`)
  })

program
  .command('get')
  .description('Get relevant parts from documentations')
  .argument('<prompt>', 'Search prompt')
  .option('--count <count>', 'Number of relevant parts to retrieve', '5')
  .option('--json', 'Output results in JSON format')
  .action((prompt, options) => {
    console.log(`Getting relevant parts from documentations for prompt ${prompt} with options ${JSON.stringify(options)}`)
  })

program.parseAsync().catch((err) => {
  console.error(err)
  process.exit(1)
})
```

Now running `bun src/main.ts` shows the following output:

```
Usage: rag [options] [command]

Simple RAG system for developers

Options:
  -V, --version           output the version number
  -h, --help              display help for command

Commands:
  docs                    Manage documentations
  get [options] <prompt>  Get relevant parts from documentations
  help [command]          display help for command
```

And doing `bun src/main.ts docs add tailwindcss https://github.com/tailwindlabs/tailwindcss` shows the following output:

```
Adding documentation tailwindcss from https://github.com/tailwindlabs/tailwindcss with options {"branch":"main", "subdir":"."}
```

So I guess the CLI interface is working as expected.

> No, you said that the `prompt` argument should be read from stdin if it doesn't exist. But it seems to be required right now.

You are right, if I do
```
bun src/main.ts get
```

I get the following error:

```
Missing required argument 'prompt'
```

To make the argument optional, we should use `[prompt]` instead of `<prompt>` in the argument definition. And now we can check when the argument is missing, and read it from stdin.

```ts
program
  .command('get')
  .argument('[prompt]', 'Search prompt')
  // ...
  .action(async (prompt, options) => {
    prompt = prompt || await Bun.stdin.text()
    console.log(`Getting relevant parts from documentations for prompt "${prompt}" with options ${JSON.stringify(options)}`)
  })
```

Which gives the following:

```
❯ bun src/main.ts get "arg prompt"
Getting relevant parts from documentations for prompt "arg prompt" with options {"count":"5"}

❯ echo "stdin prompt" | bun src/main.ts get             
Getting relevant parts from documentations for prompt "stdin prompt
" with options {"count":"5"}
```

# Summary

In this article, 

- we designed the CLI interface and chose to have the commands `add`, `update`, `remove` and `get`.
- we chose to implement the tool using Typescript and Bun.
- we implemented the CLI interface using the `commander` package.

# What's next

The next steps are:

- Add the database
- Implement the commands logic
- Add tests
- Create CI/CD pipeline

Feel free to comment if you have any suggestions or feedback. See you in the next article!